# Unit 7: 26.1.7 Lab - Snort and Firewall Rules

**Due:** 2022-10-03T04:59:00Z
**Points Possible:** 24.0
**Submission Types:** online_upload

## Instructions

Introduction

In a secure production network, network alerts are generated by various types of devices such as security appliances, firewalls, IPS devices, routers, switches, servers, and more. The problem is that not all alerts are created equally. For example, alerts generated by a server and alerts generated by a firewall will be different and vary in content and format. In this lab, we will get familiar with firewall rules and IDS signatures. 

Directions

For this assignment, you will complete a lab project via NetLab. Detailed information about Netlab system, reservation guidelines, requirements, and policies can be found under “ [link: https://canvas.park.edu/courses/69450/pages/faq-packet-tracer-netlab] Netlab FAQ”.

To complete the lab, follow these steps below.

Reserve a lab time on NetLab.

Study the lab instruction document on the NetLab environment: 26.1.7 Lab - Snort and Firewall Rules. The grading is based on the NetLab instruction. Make sure NOT to use the lab instruction on Cisco NetAcad.

Strictly follow the rubric table to answer all the questions. Notice that the rubric table may require additional screenshots to prove your work, which might not be specified in the lab instruction document. Please make sure to attach screenshot as requested on rubric table. The screenshot should include your reservation id and your account name on the NetLab system.

Due Date

By 11:59p.m., Sunday, CT

---

## My Submission

**Score:** 24.0/24.0
**Grade:** 24
**Submitted:** 2022-09-30T05:24:59Z

### Submitted Files

- **netlab.27.1.7.docx**
  - Downloaded: `files/netlab.27.1.7.docx`
