# Unit 3 Lecture: Chapter 5

IT Infrastructure and Emerging Technologies

As information becomes a valuable resource of a digital firm, the infrastructure used to care for it takes on added importance. We’ll examine all of the components that comprise today’s and tomorrow’s IT infrastructure and how best to manage it.

 [link: #fragment-1] 5.1

 [link: #fragment-2] 5.2

 [link: #fragment-3] 5.3

 [link: #fragment-4] 5.4

 [link: #fragment-5] 5.5

 [link: #fragment-6] 5.6

 [link: #fragment-7] Review Questions

5.1 What is IT infrastructure, and what are the stages and drivers of IT infrastructure evolution?

When you mention the phrase “information technology infrastructure,” most people immediately think of just hardware and software. However, there is more to it than just those two. In fact, the most important and often most-ignored component is that of services. Integrating all three components forces a business to think in terms of the value of the whole and not just the parts. Including all three components in any discussion of IT infrastructure truly fits the cliché that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

5.1.1 Defining IT Infrastructure

If you define a firm’s IT infrastructure in terms of technology, you limit the discussion to the hardware and software components. By broadening the definition to that of service-based, you are then bringing into the discussion the services generated by the first two components. Also, you are including the persware element that we discussed in Chapter 1. As technology advances the types of hardware and software available, it becomes more critical for the firm to focus on the services that a firm can provide to its customers, suppliers, employees, and business partners.

To round out the list of IT infrastructure components you need to add the following services to computing hardware and software:

Computing services: Provide platforms that ensure a coherent digital environment

Telecommunications services: Determine appropriate data, voice, and video that connect employees, customers, and suppliers

Data management services: Not just store, but manage massive amounts of corporate data and make it available for users to analyze

Application software services: Enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, supply chain management, and knowledge management systems

Physical facilities management services: Physical installation of computing, telecommunications, and data management services

IT management services: Plan and develop infrastructures, coordinate IT services among business units, account for IT expenditure, and provide project management services

IT standards services: Develop policies that ensure interoperability of all IT infrastructure components

IT education services: Train employees to properly use IT investments and educate managers about planning for and managing the investments

IT research and development services: Research future IT projects and investments

5.1.2 Evolution of IT Infrastructure

 Reviewing the evolution of corporate IT infrastructure offers some insight into where we may be headed.

 [link: #tab-1] 1959 to present →

 [link: #tab-2] 1981 to present →

 [link: #tab-3] 1983 to present →

 [link: #tab-4] 1992 to present →

 [link: #tab-5] 2000 to present

General-purpose mainframe and minicomputer era (1959 to present):

The mainframe era began with highly centralized computing with networks of terminals concentrated in the computing department. Whereas early models contained proprietary software and data, today’s mainframes are able to process a wide variety of software and data. It’s interesting to note that IBM began this era and remains the sole supplier of mainframe computing. Although the experts and pundits predicted the death of mainframes in the mid-1980s, they have evolved and remain a strong, viable component in many IT infrastructures because of their ability to store and process huge amounts of data and transmissions. Minicomputers helped usher in the concept of decentralized computing.

Resource

IBM. (n.d.). IBM Mainframes.

Personal computer era (1981 to present):

It’s interesting to note that the advances developed for personal computers in the home have given rise to much of the advances in corporate computing in the last 25 years. As the home user became more comfortable with using computers and more applications were developed for personal computers, employees demanded increased use of computers in the workplace. Although the Wintel PC standard has dominated this era, open-source software is starting to put a big dent into that stronghold.

Resource

Mason, E. (2016, February 24) [link: http://www.historyextra.com/article/history-1980s-home-computer-boom-brave-new-world%C2%A0] . A brave new world: the 1980s home computer boom.

Client/server era (1983 to present):

As the desktop and laptop personal computers became more powerful and cheaper, businesses began using them to replace mini-computers and some mainframe computers by networking them together. Think of an octopus, with the body representing the server and the tentacles representing the clients. At the heart of every network is a server. It can be a mainframe, midrange, minicomputer, workstation, or a souped-up personal computer. It’s where some of the data, applications software, and other instructions are stored that network users need in order to communicate with and process transactions on the network. Large companies use a multitiered client/server architecture that has several different levels of servers. Web servers, as the name implies, provide web pages to users. The client computer is the node on the network that users need to access and process transactions and data through the network. Rather than one server trying to do it all, each server is assigned a specific task on an application server. Dividing tasks among multiple servers allows faster, more efficient responses that cost a business less to process than a mainframe would or one computer trying to do it all.

Resources

Mitchell, B. (2017, March 21). Clients and servers are the basic building blocks of computer networks.

Brain, M (2000, 1 2000) How Web Servers Work. 

Enterprise computing era (1992 to present):

Perhaps no other era has seen the explosive growth in functionality and popularity as this era. The problems created by proprietary, closed systems are being solved by the standards and open-source software created in this era. The promise of truly integrated hardware, software, and services is coming true with the technological advances in the last fifteen years. On the other hand, the promises of delivering critical business information painlessly and seamlessly across all organizational levels are made all the more difficult to meet because of the ever-changing landscape of technology products and services.

Resource

What is Enterprise Computing? (n.d.). 

Cloud and mobile computing era (2000 to present):

It almost seems as though we’ve come full circle with the concept of cloud computing. This model of computing relies on the massive computing centers owned by the likes of Google, IBM, Microsoft, and even Amazon.com. “What is Google’s cloud? It’s a network made of hundreds of thousands, or by some estimates 1 million, cheap servers, each not much more powerful than the PCs we have in our homes. It stores staggering amounts of data, including numerous copies of the World Wide Web. This makes search faster, helping ferret out answers to billions of queries in a fraction of a second. Unlike many traditional supercomputers, Google’s system never ages. When its individual pieces die, usually after about three years, engineers pluck them out and replace them with new, faster boxes. This means the cloud regenerates as it grows, almost like a living thing.” (“Google and the Wisdom of Clouds,” BusinessWeek, Dec 24, 2007)

Resource

Baker, S. (2007, December 13). [link: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2007-12-12/google-and-the-wisdom-of-clouds%C2%A0]  Google and the Wisdom of Clouds.

 

 As you realize that each era built upon previous advances made in hardware, software, and services, let your imagination drift for a moment to the possibilities that the future holds. It truly is an exciting time to be involved in technology.

5.1.3 Technology Drivers of Infrastructure Evolution

 Here are some of the reasons we’ve evolved so much in the last 20 years.

Moore’s Law and Microprocessing Power: Perhaps no other law holds as much weight in the evolution of computers as Moore’s Law. Take a moment to visit the [link: http://www.intel.com/technology/silicon/mooreslaw/index.html]  Intel.com web site that describes it in more detail. Microprocessor chips using transistors have helped increase computing power exponentially. However, nanotechnology is the promise of the future. This new technology is being developed because of the limitations of the older technology.

The law of mass digital storage: As the amount of digital information expands, so too does our need and desire for more storage. In the early evolution of computing, storage needs were based on written text. Now we need the extra storage for photos, music, and video. How much storage does the average user really need? Is it the chicken-or-the-egg syndrome: Give me more storage and I’ll find something to do with it or, I now have all these new applications therefore I need more storage. One thing is certain, users will demand more storage and the technologists will develop it.

Metcalfe’s Law and network economics: If you build a network for ten users, you’ll spend the necessary money for the basic equipment. If you already have the equipment in place, you can add one more user at nominal costs. However, the additional user will bring value to the network far beyond what it costs to add him/her.

Declining communications costs and the Internet: One of the biggest drivers in the exploding use of computers is directly attributable to the Internet. It’s getting cheaper every day to connect to the Internet because of declining communication costs. As more and more users connect to the Internet, businesses must find ways to meet the expectations and demands of users, especially in the area of mobile computing devices.

Standards and network effects: Nothing has helped grow the Internet more than having technology standards in place allowing suppliers to create and build products that work seamlessly with each other. Users have come to rely on the interoperability of products.

Table 5.1 explains the standards that have laid the groundwork for services we now enjoy in technology.

Bottom Line

We’ve come so far so quickly in the evolution of technology. From massive, expensive mainframe computers to inexpensive, handheld devices, the evolution and revolution continues.

5.2 What are the components of IT infrastructure?

What if you bought a car that didn’t include tires, a steering wheel, a radio, or a heater? After purchasing this vehicle, you had to shop around for the missing parts. When you entered a store, you are confronted with eight different steering wheels, six different radios, and nine different heaters. You quickly realize how incompatible the parts are with different brands of vehicles and wished that the manufacturers simply put all the parts together for you. Once assembled, you drive to the gas station only to realize that your car can’t use that brand of gasoline. How frustrating.

In part, that is what has happened to computers and peripherals over the years. In the early days of personal computers, the printer you had your eye on may not have worked with your brand of computers. You had to buy a scanner built specifically for your computer. You couldn’t connect to the Internet unless you had the correct modem for your Internet Service Provider. If you wanted to share photos with your friends, each of you had to have four different software programs, each of which would process the others’ photos. Now expand these examples to a corporate enterprise system. The evolution we are now experiencing is aiming to fix these problems and make computing ubiquitous anytime, anywhere. Let’s look at the seven major components of systems necessary to see us through to this goal.

5.2.1 Computer Hardware Platforms

The microprocessor is the heart of any computing device no matter how small or large. Two companies produce most microprocessing chips, Intel and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD).

Although the network is becoming commonplace and the heart of computing, network service providers must have the necessary server backbone in place to meet increasing demand. Blade servers are meeting the needs of service providers more cheaply and more easily than traditional big-box servers. IBM offers mainframe computers that can also provide the network processing although they are more expensive and require Unix software. In fact, IBM is the only manufacturer of mainframe computers.

When we think of hardware platforms we tend to focus on desktop and laptop computers. But in the last few years a second computer hardware platform has emerged that promises to dwarf desktops and laptops—mobile computing devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. Because these devices aren’t expected to accomplish as many complicated tasks as traditional hardware they use “reduced instruction set computers” (RISC). They use less power and are faster than “complex instruction set computers” (CISC) chips used in the larger computers.

5.2.2 Operating System Platforms

Operating systems tell computers what to do, when to do it, and how. Operations such as logging on, file management, and network connectivity are controlled by the operating system. By far the most prolific operating system is Microsoft Windows in various versions. Windows is also one of the operating systems used by mobile computing devices such as handheld PDAs and cell phones.

Unix and Linux are often associated with large networks that require less application overhead and faster processing. Linux open-source software is becoming the operating system of choice for organizations looking to save money. Businesses and governments across the globe are adopting the Linux platform as a way to reduce IT spending and licensing costs.

The small mobile computing devices we discussed earlier, cell phones, smartphones, and netbooks, don’t have the computing capacity to handle a full-size operating system software program. And, many of the functions in Linux and Unix aren’t necessary on these smaller computers. Users are opting for lightweight operating systems such as Google Chrome and Android instead.

“Chrome OS was targeted initially towards netbooks, super small notebooks designed primarily for Web browsing. Although some netbooks were sold with Linux, the consumer preference tended toward Windows, and then consumers decided that maybe the novelty wasn't worth it. Netbooks were often far too small and far too underpowered. 

Google's vision for Chrome extends beyond the netbook. The operating system might eventually be a real competitor to Windows and Mac operating systems.

However, Google doesn't consider Chrome OS to be a tablet operating system. Android is Google's tablet operating system because it's built around a touch-screen interface while Chrome OS still uses a keyboard and mouse or touchpad.” (What Is the Google Chrome OS?, Lifewire.com, Karch, Marziah, Updated Nov. 9, 2018)

The Google Chrome OS makes it easy for users to access cloud computing services through wireless networking. Almost all the software and data are stored on servers and accessed through a web browser.

Many smartphones use multitouch technology that allows users to pinch the screen or swipe their fingers over the screen to issue commands. The new Windows 10 operating software and Apple’s iOS extends that technology to full-size desktop and laptop computers.

5.2.3 Enterprise Software Applications

Enterprise Software Applications

Automated Billing Systems

Business Intelligence (BI)

Customer Relationship Management (CRM)

Payment Processing, etc

Integrating applications into seamless processes across the organization is the goal of enterprise software applications. Customer relationship management and supply chain management systems are the two most popular applications in this category. We explore them more extensively in later chapters. These applications are becoming popular and more affordable for even small and medium-size businesses thanks to the proliferation of networks.

5.2.4 Data Management and Storage

Businesses and organizations are gathering more and more data on customers, employees, and even the business itself. Managing and storing the data so they are easily accessible and provide meaningful information to the organization is becoming a science in and of itself. Storage area networks (SANs) provide a cohesive, economical way to consolidate data from across any and all systems within the business. Online users want instant access to data and SANs help companies provide it.

5.2.5 Networking/Telecommunications Platforms

As we continue the march toward convergence of all things digital, networking and telecommunications platforms will merge into one. Rather than having one platform for networking computer devices and a separate platform for telecommunications, we’ll see one company providing a combination of telephone services, cell phone connectivity, computers and peripheral devices, handheld PDAs, and wireless services all rolled into one. Many telecommunications companies are now partnering with Internet service providers to offer a complete package of digital services.

5.2.6 Internet Platforms

The Internet and its technology standards continue to expand the services businesses are able to provide their employees, customers, suppliers, and business partners. Intranets and extranets built on Internet technologies give businesses an easy and inexpensive method of providing services that were cost prohibitive a few years ago.

Rather than purchase all of the hardware necessary to support web sites, intranets, and extranets, many small and medium-sized companies use web hosting services instead. It’s cheaper and easier to have these service providers take care of hardware, software, and security issues while the business concentrates on its core processes.

5.2.7 Consulting and System Integration Services

Systems used in many medium- and large-sized companies and organizations are so complex that most businesses simply can’t manage all of them on their own. Integration services provided by the likes of IBM and Hewlett-Packard are necessary to simply keep up with changes. In many ways it makes more business sense for a company such as Frito-Lay to concentrate on its core processes of making snack food and let IBM take care of the technology issues.

These services become more critical as many companies merge their old legacy systems with newer technologies such as wireless computing. The legacy systems, some as old as 20 or 30 years, simply can’t be thrown away and must work seamlessly with today’s technologies. Companies choose not to totally replace legacy systems because it’s too expensive, involves too much training, and carries too much organizational change. It’s easier to use middleware and other technologies to merge old and new systems.

Bottom Line

There are seven major components of a modern IT infrastructure: Hardware platforms, operating system platforms, enterprise software applications, data management and storage, networking/telecommunications platforms, Internet platforms, and consulting and system integration services. Melding them into a cohesive system that adequately serves the digital corporation is difficult, but the rewards are many.

5.3 What are the current trends in computer hardware platforms?

If some of these IT infrastructure components such as storage and telecommunications have gotten so cheap, why does it seem like companies are spending more and more money on information technology? Because users are demanding better, faster, and easier ways to use computers and more ways to communicate with others.

Let’s discuss some of these hardware technologies that are helping companies meet the growing technology demand of employees, customers, suppliers, and business partners.

5.3.1 The Mobile Digital Platform

Anytime, anywhere, 24/7, 365. That’s what computer users now expect. Technology manufacturers are meeting the demand with a host of new communication devices such as cell phones and smartphones. Smartphones are getting—well—smarter and providing more reasons for users to migrate away from traditional desktop PC computing.

The newest gadgets on the market are tablet computers and e-book readers such as the Kindle from Amazon.com or Apple’s iPad. Tablets are miniaturized subnotebooks that are built specifically for wireless communications and Internet access. Even though they may be small in size, they still pack a lot of computing power.

On the horizon are wearable computer devices that will perform a wide range of tasks seamlessly with the user and other computing devices.

“Evolving at a massive rate, wearable technology is growing in a bullish trend.
Wearables are not a thing of bling anymore rather the drift we witness today is paving the path for them to become necessities soon. Be it healthcare, entertainment, fashion or fitness, wearable technology is gradually becoming pervasive.
As technology is advancing, so are our expectations. Undoubtedly, we have been enjoying an enhanced and improved quality of life due to this advancement.

From voice command selfies to receiving/sending text messages via voice commands to tracking down the calorie expenditure, serving as a cashless payment method and even chasing your health parameters, wearables are becoming ubiquitous.

As per reports by Statista, 453 million devices have been discovered as connected wearable devices in the year 2017 and this number is expected to grow to 929 million devices by 2021.  

Industry leaders expect the wearable technology market to explode in the next 10 years and is expected to reach a value of $150 billion by 2027.” (Wearable Technology Future Top Trends for 2019, www.techiesindiainc.com, April 13, 2019)

Interactive Session

Technology: Is Business Ready for Wearable Computers? (see page 181 of the text) explains how businesses are starting to use wearable computing devices to improve worker productivity and enhance the workplace environment. The challenges to wearable computers include security concerns, accuracy of the sensors, and safety of those who wear them.

5.3.2 Consumerization of IT and BYOD

In the past, computing devices and software were developed specifically for business applications. Very seldom did the hardware and software spill over into the consumer market. On the flip side, hardware and software created for consumer use saw very little application in the business world. That has changed in the last few years as the two have merged and crossed over. Now, software platforms such as Facebook have found a cozy home in the business world. As more and more people purchased smartphones and other technologies for their personal use, they were not content to leave the handy devices at home when they went to work.

The consumerization of IT explains the technology along with BYOD, bring your own device. But, along with bringing their own devices, employees are bringing a new set of problems to the doorstep of their organization’s IT department. The most prevalent problem is securing the business’s core information systems from threats posed by malware and data theft. Access to the corporate network must continue to be protected while still giving employees fairly easy access to data, information, and applications.

It’s a delicate balance for the IT department that must manage and control these consumer technologies while making sure they serve the needs of the business.

5.3.3 Quantum Computing

Some problems are so big it would take conventional computers years to process all the data through hundreds of thousands of processes to arrive at an answer. An emerging technology that may resolve that situation is quantum computing. A quantum computer has enormous processing power through the ability to be in many different states at once, allowing it to perform multiple operations simultaneously. That allows scientific and business problems to be solved millions of times faster than regular computers can solve them.

5.3.4 Virtualization

Server computer hardware prices have fallen over the years to the point where they’re relatively cheap. Hence, the problem. Rather than increase the efficiency and utilization of existing hardware, many companies just buy more of it and stick it on the shelf. Not much thought is given to the total cost of ownership (TCO) of all the hardware. As it turns out, the TCO is as much or more than the original purchase price. And, the hardware utilization rates are extremely low. We’ll examine the concept of TCO more at the end of this chapter.

For example, let’s say you leave your kitchen light burning 24 hours a day. You only spend about 4 hours a day actually in the kitchen. You end up wasting 20 hours of electricity for those 4 hours of use.

Of course, this is a simplified example, but you get the idea of how computer usage is wasted running all those servers for a fraction of the time they’re actually used. It’s not unusual for a company to have one server for this application and another server for that application. The applications are stored on separate servers using different operating systems. It’s a very wasteful configuration.

Enter virtualization. It’s the process of running multiple operating systems and application programs on one machine and increasing the overall utilization rates of the device. Instead of having ten servers running ten different applications, virtualization consolidates the programs onto one or two servers.

Here’s a list of the benefits businesses enjoy from using virtualization:

Increase equipment utilization rates

Conserve data center space and energy usage

Require fewer computers and servers

Combine legacy applications with newer applications

Facilitate centralization and consolidation of hardware administration

Companies are saving money and resources through virtualization by using software-defined storage (SDS). SDS replaces expensive storage hardware with lower-cost commodity hardware and cloud storage hardware. 

5.3.5 Cloud Computing

Most companies don’t build their own electrical generating plants or their own water treatment facilities. They purchase only the utilities they need, even in peak demand times. Why not do that with computing capacity? If JCPenney.com needs 50 percent more capacity during the 30-day Christmas buying period, why should it have to purchase that much infrastructure only to have it sit idle the other eleven months of the year?

Cloud computing is defined by five characteristics:

On-demand self-service: Users can access computing capabilities whenever and wherever they are.

Ubiquitous network access: No special devices are necessary for accessing data or services.

Location independent resource pooling: Users don’t need to be concerned about where the data are stored.

Rapid elasticity: Computing resources expand and contract as necessary to serve users.

Measured service: Users pay only for the computing capabilities actually used.

Figure 5.9 Cloud Computing Platform

Almost any type of computing device can access data and applications from these clouds through three types of services:

Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): Allows customers to process and store data and use networking and other resources available from the cloud.

Platform as a service (PaaS): The service provider offers infrastructure and programming tools to customers so they can develop and test applications.

Software as a service (SaaS): The vendor provides software programs on a subscription fee basis.

Interactive Session

Organizations: Look to the Cloud (see page 186 of the text), explores the advantages and disadvantages of using cloud computing in both large and small businesses as it is now the fastest-growing form of computing.

Cloud computing is becoming popular because customers pay only for the computing infrastructure that they actually use. In many cases users experience lower IT costs than if they had to buy all the equipment, hire the technical staff to run it and maintain it, and purchase software applications. This type of on-demand computing is beneficial to small and medium-size companies because they can easily scale their IT requirements as the pace of their business needs it. Larger organizations, however, may not want their most sensitive data stored on servers that they don’t control. System reliability is also a special concern to all businesses. The unavailability of business data and applications for even a few hours may be unacceptable.

“Data are from various authoritative sources, including Gartner. half of the companies uses private cloud applications, and almost one third use public cloud solutions. More and more companies are considering the public cloud.

After deployment in cloud, three out of four public cloud users indicate an improvement in location-independent access to their IT. Two-thirds see faster scalability of their own resources. For half thinks that the security of their data (from hackers) has improved through the public cloud. One out of every five companies indicates that the administrative burden has decreased or IT costs have been decreased.

However, there is still skepticism about public cloud offers. For example, about a quarter of public cloud users complain that security incidents have occurred in their cloud solutions over the past 12 months. For another 21 percent had such a suspicion. For businesses, security is critical when using applications in the public cloud.

At this point, many analysts see the cloud providers in the obligation. Concern about data security is also a major reason why some of the economy is not yet banking on the public cloud. Almost two-thirds of non-users fear unauthorized access to sensitive corporate data. More than half worry about data being lost in the cloud. Every second non-user suspects an unclear legal situation. However, the bottom line is that the skepticism about the cloud is easing somewhat in the companies, is that the cloud providers have done a good job of educating and gaining in trust.” (Cloud Computing Service Failures and Disruptions, www.thecustomizewindows.com, Ghosh, Abhishek, June 13, 2018)

 Three kinds of clouds are available:

Public cloud: Owned and operated by external service providers; accessed through the Internet; available to anyone; generally used for non-sensitive data.

Private cloud: Proprietary system owned and operated by a specific company; based on virtualization; available only to users inside the company; generally used for sensitive financial and personal data.

Hybrid cloud: Generally used by large corporations that store the most essential core activities on their own infrastructure and use the cloud for less-critical systems or additional processing capabilities.

On-demand computing, another term for cloud computing, mirrors other utilities that provide necessary infrastructure from centralized sources. It’s cheaper and helps companies reduce the total cost of ownership of IT technology. They can also take advantage of newer technologies than what they are able to buy and maintain on their own. Cloud computing also gives companies a chance to expand services that perhaps they wouldn’t be able to provide if they had to buy all the hardware and software.

5.3.6 Edge Computing

Because so much data are being collected and either stored or processed on cloud computers, it has become necessary to create ways that the data can be quickly transmitted back and forth between the users and the cloud. Edge computing helps solve the problem by locating some smaller server computers closer in the network to the users. With this configuration, data doesn’t have to travel as far and mainstream processes can be located on the servers to speed things up.

5.3.7 Green Computing

Virtualization, which we discussed earlier, makes the concept of green computing more of a reality. It allows businesses to reduce their total cost of ownership of hardware through more efficient use of servers, printers, storage devices, and networking equipment. In turn, that reduces the impact on the environment. Power consumption alone raises the TCO of servers to very high levels—businesses spend as much running a server as they did on purchasing it.

5.3.8 High-Performance and Power-Saving Processors

As businesses require more and more computing capacity, hardware and chip manufacturers are answering the need with multicore processors. Rather than a single chip on a single processing core, you purchase a machine with two or more processors. It reduces the overall number of servers or processors, thus reducing the total cost of ownership, including electricity costs. The motivation to reduce power consumption is migrating to netbooks, tablets, smartphones, and mobile computing devices.

 

Bottom Line

There are many different ways a business can meet its computing demands: mobile digital platforms, grid computing, cloud computing, autonomic computing, virtualization, and multicore processing. Although these services may be relatively new, rest assured they will grow in demand as companies require better ways to manage IT infrastructures.

5.4 What are the current computer software platforms and trends?

What if you bought a beautiful new car with all the fanciest equipment inside, but when you tried to start the engine nothing happened? How can that be, you ask? The car cost a lot of money and it’s brand new! However, as soon as you put some gasoline in the tank, it starts right up and you’re moving down the road.

You can have all the computer hardware money can buy, but if you don’t have the right software, you can’t do very much with the hardware and you’ve wasted a lot of money. Let’s review some information about software platform trends that helps get the most out of your hardware. As we discuss these trends, you’ll find a common thread through all of them—they are generally not restricted to a certain type of hardware or a certain brand of software.

5.4.1 Linux and Open-Source Software

Security problems in proprietary software are usually discovered by those working inside the particular software manufacturer. That task is often restricted by the number of employees dedicated to the task, resource allocation, and organizational problems that don’t confound the open-source software movement. Open-source software has proven to be more secure than other leading software programs precisely because its code is so readily available. And, more people are able to review the code, find problems, and fix them more quickly.

 Open-source software isn’t limited to Linux; it includes applications such as Mozilla Firefox web browser and free office suite software such as OpenOffice.

OpenOffice.org 3 is the result of over twenty years’ software engineering. Designed from the start as a single piece of software, it has a consistency other products cannot match. A completely open development process means that anyone can report bugs, request new features, or enhance the software. The result: OpenOffice.org 3 does everything you want your office software to do, the way you want it to. (OpenOffice.org)

In the early 1990s, a graduate student at the University of Finland wanted to build an operating system that anyone could download from the Internet, no one would own, and hundreds or thousands of people would work together on the creation, maintenance, and improvement. He began working on what is now known as Linux, a Unix-like operating system. He posted his program to a web page and allowed anyone to change and improve the code. Its use has expanded rapidly because its small size and low cost make it ideal for information appliances. It’s also less crash-prone than most other operating systems. That’s a feature that makes it very attractive to companies running e-commerce Internet businesses.

5.4.2 Software for the Web: Java, HTML, and HTML5

Java fulfills the need for interactive programming over the Internet. What makes this language so enticing is that it is platform-independent. This means that you don’t need to worry about compatibility between separate operating systems such as Windows, Macintosh, or UNIX. Regardless of the hardware or software you use, this language will serve them all.

Java creates miniature programs called “applets,” which perform very small, specialized, one-at-a-time tasks. When a user wants to perform the task, the coding is moved from the server where it’s permanently stored and then executed on the client computer. When the task is completed, it’s deleted from the client. In essence, you use an applet once and then literally throw it away. Using applets reduces storage needs on client computers and PCs. Again, it doesn’t matter whether the client is a PC or a terminal attached to a network. In fact, Java applets are being used on handheld computers, and on many other non-computer appliances.

Java also reduces the “bloatware” problem of huge software application programs with more functions than the average person could ever hope to use. You don’t need a large application program to do a simple task. If you want to calculate the monthly payments for a car loan, you simply use a Java applet instead of a huge spreadsheet program.

5.4.2.1 HTML and HTML5

It’s becoming quite common for the average computer user to create web pages using the Hypertext markup language (HTML). In fact, by using the PC software tools we discussed earlier (Word 2010, Lotus 1-2-3, PowerPoint), you can as easily create a web page as you can a letter, chart, or database. Combining HTML language into everyday applications is one more step toward integrating the Internet into everything we do.

The original version of HTML was created when the web was first born. It never took into account that eventually people would want to incorporate audio, video, and pictures within a web page. More importantly, the authors of basic HTML language never envisioned that people would want to access the web through small handheld devices, smartphones, tablets, and netbooks. As our computing hardware has evolved, so too must the software that provides information to all those devices. The next evolution of HTML is HTML5.

HTML5 is the latest evolution of the standard that defines HTML. The term represents two different concepts. It is a new version of the language HTML, with new elements, attributes, and behaviors, and a larger set of technologies that allows the building of more diverse and powerful Web sites and applications. This set is sometimes called HTML5 & friends and often shortened to just HTML5.

Designed to be usable by all Open Web developers, HTML5 technologies are classified into several groups based on their function.

Semantics: allowing you to describe more precisely what your content is.

Connectivity: allowing you to communicate with the server in new and innovative ways.

Offline and storage: allowing webpages to store data on the client-side locally and operate offline more efficiently.

Multimedia: making video and audio first-class citizens in the Open Web.

2D/3D graphics and effects: allowing a much more diverse range of presentation options.

Performance and integration: providing greater speed optimization and better usage of computer hardware.

Device access: allowing for the usage of various input and output devices.

Styling: letting authors write more sophisticated themes. (HTML5,  [link: https://developer.mozilla.org] https://developer.mozilla.org, copied April 13, 2019)

HTML5 provides a more robust way to incorporate images, audio, and video into web pages making them more dynamic. It also provides better functionality of web pages on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers.

5.4.3 Web Services and Service-Oriented Architecture

Web services use Internet technology to link application programs together without having to create custom coding. And, as the name suggests, they are web-based, making them more universally accepted within a business or across traditional organizational boundaries, extending to customers, suppliers, and business partners.

The distinct advantage of building web services is their reusability. That is, you can build one web service that can be used by many different businesses. This kind of functionality promises a whole slew of new Internet-related development companies will spring up in the next few years as this idea takes hold.

As we use the web for more applications, computer languages are evolving to keep up with new and innovative uses. HTML has worked well for displaying text and graphics. However, current computing environments demand more. XML is designed to control data on a web page or site and make it more manageable.

A white paper written by Jon Bosak, Sun Microsystems, explains XML:

XML gives us a single, human-readable syntax for serializing just about any kind of structured data—including relational data—in a way that lets it be manipulated and displayed using simple, ubiquitous, standardized tools. The larger implications of a standard, easily processed serial data format are hard to imagine, but they are obviously going to have a large impact on electronic commerce. And it seems clear that electronic commerce is eventually going to become synonymous with commerce in general.

XML can do for data what Java has done for programs, which is to make the data both platform-independent and vendor-independent. This capability is driving a wave of middleware XML applications that will begin to wash over us around the beginning of 1999. However, the ability of XML to support data and metadata exchange shouldn’t be allowed to distract us from the purpose for which XML was originally designed. The designers of XML had in mind not just a transport layer for data but a universal media-independent publishing format that would support users at every level of expertise in every language.

It’s all part of the evolution of the Internet.

A web service-oriented architecture combines separate applications like a secure, third-party billing transaction with a payment system into one cohesive unit.

5.4.4 Software Outsourcing and Cloud Services

Earlier we described how businesses have turned to outside vendors to meet their hardware needs. Organizations are now doing much the same for their software needs. Three external sources for software outsourcing are:

Software packages from a commercial vendor

Cloud-based software services and tools

Outsourcing custom application development to an outside software firm

5.4.4.1 Software Packages and Enterprise Software

Rather than design, write, test, and maintain legacy systems, many organizations choose to purchase software packages from other companies that specialize in certain programs. Let’s face it; there isn’t much difference between the accounting needs of a snack food manufacturer and a paper manufacturer. So why not purchase a prewritten, fully tested, software program regardless of the business you are in?

5.4.4.2 Software Outsourcing

Companies are discovering that it’s cheaper and easier to hire third-party vendors for software related tasks such as system maintenance, data management, and program development. Much as they’ve outsourced mundane and repetitive tasks to mainly overseas locations, many companies are outsourcing all kinds of software related work. The Internet has made this option more viable than it ever was.

5.4.4.3 Cloud-Based Software Services and Tools

Small and mid-size companies in need of sophisticated software can rent only what they need and can afford through online software as a service (SaaS) providers. For instance, Right Now Technologies provides applications services via the Internet for customer service and marketing programs. Businesses can outsource their accounting needs to a web-based service such as Intuit’s online payroll services.

Because these services are web-based, data are accessible from virtually any computer connected to the Internet. The road-warriors love having instant access to documents from wherever they are. Workers can collaborate with others in distant offices through a web-based SaaS, and no one has to worry about their files being compatible with others—they are.

There is some danger in outsourcing your information resources to this kind of service. Remember, all your data are stored on another company’s server computers and you have little control of it. What happens if the service provider goes out of business? How secure are data stored on the servers? What kind of scalability and capacity planning has the service completed? These are just some of the issues managers must address when they consider using SaaS providers versus in-house technology support.

Businesses must exercise caution when using software outsourcing or SaaS providers. If things can go wrong, they likely will. Service level agreements (SLA) help protect both customers and the service providers. Here are the main points of SLAs:

Defines responsibilities of the service provider and level of service expected by the customer

Specifies the nature and level of services provided

Criteria for performance measurement

Support options

Provisions for security and disaster recovery

Hardware and software ownership and upgrades

Customer support, billing, and conditions for termination

5.4.4.4 Mashups and Apps

You may be familiar with mapping services on the web such as Mapquest.com or Google maps. These applications provide an easy method to find your way around town. Separately, you may have used a shopping site to locate stores that carry products you’re most interested in. What if you could combine these two separate applications into one and make your web browsing easier and faster—not to mention your offline shopping excursion? That’s the idea behind mashups. Mashups combine two online applications—mapping and shopping—into one new application. If you’d like to see an example of how convenient mashups are, visit MotoMap.com to get consolidated information and maps of motor cross and dirt bike trails across the United States.

Let’s say you’re shopping at Macy’s and see a blouse or shirt that you just love. The price seems a little high but you’re not sure you can get it more cheaply somewhere else. All you have to do is pull out your smartphone, download an app, scan the bar code or enter a few details about the blouse, and in seconds you’ll have information about other places that carry the item, the price, and maybe how many they have in stock. Apps, short for applications, are very small programs that perform one particular task. They can be loaded to your handheld computing device, including smartphones, e-book readers (in some cases), or tablet computers such as the iPad. Some are free and others range from $0.99 to $4.99. Generally they are written by third-party developers following a strict set of guidelines established by the device maker.

It’s worth noting that most apps are developed for a specific device or devices from a specific company. Apps that are written for the Apple company will run on any Apple device. However, apps written for an Apple device generally will not run on a device that uses the Android operating system. More and more apps are being created for the business user that lets her access server documents, call up sales data from the corporate database, or schedule meetings with colleagues or customers.  

Bottom Line

The five major themes in contemporary software platform evolution—Linux and open-source software; Java; web services and service-oriented architecture; mashups and apps; and software outsourcing—are providing companies new options in IT infrastructure technologies.

5.5 What are the challenges of managing IT infrastructure and management solutions?

The speed and computing capacity of technology continues to advance at dizzying speeds and in ways we can hardly dream. Star Trek is no longer a vision for the 24th century but for next week. Keeping up with all the advancements can be a major task in itself.

5.5.1 Dealing with Platform and Infrastructure Change

To be sure, it’s extremely hard to figure out ahead of time how much computing capacity a company will need. It’s like gazing into a crystal ball and trying to discern the future. Managers need to design scalability into their systems so that they don’t under- or overbuild their systems. The idea is to initially build the system for what the company thinks they need, but to design it in such a way that increasing capacity is a fairly easy thing to do. If the system is more successful than originally thought, or as the number of users increases, capacity can be increased without having to start over from scratch.

Now that employees are relying on mobile computing devices to accomplish more tasks, businesses need to develop policies and procedures that are adaptable to the new technology. Mobility device management (MDM) software makes the job of tracking, updating, and securing mobile devices much easier. The software lets the IT department monitor mobile usage, install or update mobile software, back up and restore mobile devices, and remove software and data from devices that are stolen or lost.

The issues businesses need to address include:

Inventorying all mobile devices in business use

Developing policies and tools for tracking, updating, and securing them

Controlling the data and applications that run on them

Firms that use cloud computing and software-as-a-service need to address these issues:

Make new contractual arrangements with remote vendors for IT infrastructure availability.

Meet corporate standards for information security.

Determine and ensure acceptable levels of computer response time and availability.

5.5.2 Management and Governance

Technology continues to proliferate in every business, large and small. Users are more familiar and comfortable with technology and usually see it as a helpful addition to their workload. Sometimes though that can lead to disagreements about who will manage an organization’s IT infrastructure. Will you have highly centralized control that may stifle the ability of users to get the job done but provide for a cohesive, secure computing environment? Or will you have a decentralized governance of information technology that can also create a myriad of problems for the company? Unfortunately, there are no absolute right or wrong answers. These questions must be answered individually for each organization.

5.5.3 Making Wise Infrastructure Investments

Electronic business, electronic commerce, and digitization of the corporate world continue to grow. The Internet is touted as being 24/7, anytime, anywhere. For that model to work, hardware, software, and data must be available 24/7, anytime, anywhere. Companies are rethinking their strategic models for creating, processing, storing, and delivering data to meet the demands of employees, customers, suppliers, and business partners. If a company fails to do so they risk losing business and thousands or millions of dollars. Because of easy Internet access and competition, customers can simply go elsewhere if the company doesn’t adjust to the new world.

5.5.3.1 Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of Technology Assets

The cost issue is becoming more important to businesses and companies as computer technology and networks grow. Depending on the configuration of the network, a company can save or lose many dollars. What’s most important to remember is that the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) should extend past the hard dollars spent on hardware and software. The cost should incorporate such items as employee training, their ability to perform necessary functions given the network configuration, and lost productivity when the network is down. The TCO should also include the amount of money spent on communications wiring (telephone wires, fiber-optic cable, etc.) and security and access issues. Table 5.4 can help you determine the TCO cost components you need to consider for your organization.

Table 5-4 Total cost of Ownership (TCO) Cost Components 

Infrastructure Component 
Cost Components

Hardware acquisition 
Purchase price of computer hardware equipment, including computers, terminals, storage, and printers

Software acquisition 
Purchase or license of software for each user

Installation
cost to install computers and software

Training
Cost to provide training for information systems specialists and end users

Support
Cost to provide ongoing technical support, help desks, and so forth

Maintenance
Cost to upgrade the hardware and software

Infrastructure
Cost to acquire, maintain, and support related infrastructure, such as networks and specialized equipment (including storage backup units)

Downtime
cost of lost productivity if hardware or software failures cause the system to be unavailable for processing and user tasks

Space and energy
Real estate and utility costs four housing and providing power for the technology

By no means should managers simply count the dollars spent on the hardware and software; they need to also determine the persware cost.

5.5.3.2 Competitive Forces Model for IT Infrastructure Investment

Does your company spend too little on IT infrastructure thereby foregoing opportunities for new or improved products and services? Or does your company spend too much on IT infrastructure thereby wasting precious resources that could be utilized elsewhere? By using a competitive forces model for IT infrastructure investment, your company could align its IT spending with its needs.

Inventory the market demand for your firm’s services

Analyze your firm’s five-year business strategy

Examine your firm’s IT strategy, infrastructure, and cost for the next five years

Determine where your firm is on the bell curve between old technologies and brand new ones

Benchmark your service levels against your competitors

Benchmark your IT expenditures against your competitors

Some of these tasks are very difficult because of how quickly technology improvements come into the marketplace. Even so, it’s worth the effort.

Bottom Line

So where are we going with all this technology? Computers that are easier to use and incorporated into our everyday lives are in the near future. Improved technologies for business computing are being introduced each day. Faster and smaller information appliances are coming to a store near you. Managers at all levels of an organization will be involved in the process of selecting IT infrastructure components appropriate for the organization’s needs. When it comes to the future of computing, our imagination is the only thing holding us back.

5.6 How will MIS help my career?

The chapter’s elements and information can help in securing a good job as an entry-level information technology consultant. This position will work with the firm’s account managers to maintain good relationships with existing clients and help its technology consultants create solutions and proposals for prospective customers. These types of jobs are becoming more popular as information technology becomes more important in the workplace.

Review

Determine the total cost of ownership associated with the technology in your workplace or classroom, even if that’s your own home. Use your hourly wage or salary as a basis to figure the persware cost.

Describe the five technology drivers of the infrastructure evolution. Which do you think has been the most influential in helping us achieve the level of technology we enjoy today?

Discuss how cloud computing can provide value to a business.

What is Java and how is it changing the computing environment?

Discuss the business value of open-source software.

 

Compare your answers with  [link: https://canvas.park.edu/courses/57651/pages/unit-3-lecture-chapter-5-answers-to-review-questions] these.

 [link: #top] BACK TO TOP

Please select the next tab above to move to the next content tab or the next button below to move to the next topic.
