# Unit 2: Content Highlights - Entity-Relationship Diagrams

This page highlights the main points main points on Entity-Relationship Diagrams (ERD) and complement some of the textbook explanations. It is recommended to first read this week’s assigned chapters from the textbook, and then come back to this document for further commentary.

The highlights of this week’s readings are:

ERDs are a Way to Gather Information to Start Designing a Database System

When creating a new database system, the first step is to try to gather as much information as possible on the way the data is handled: how is the original data obtained, who uses the data and how it is manipulated, and which knowledge is expected to produce.

To obtain this information, we may talk with people involved in all aspects related to data, from its origin to its manipulation, and the results it produces. Another thing that can be done is to study all current forms and reports that involve the data. This will provide other insights on data relationships. After every conversation and document analysis, all gathered information should be summarized with an ERD. An ERD is an expressive and powerful tool that helps to capture the organization of data within a system into entities, and the relations among them. After any new conversation or analysis of a document, new ERDs may be created, and old ones may be revised. This is an iterative process, in which a whole set of ERDs gets increasingly refined. The final product is a collection of ERDs that describes the true nature of the data and its relations in a system. These diagrams can be used in future stages of development, but are also used to talk with non-database experts about this data.

Entities

As the name indicates, an Entity Relationship Diagram is a graphical representation of Entities and their relationships. Within a system under study, an entity could be anything that is a source of related data. This is a very flexible definition, and part of the art of designing a database is to be able to select good entities to have in a system. For example, let us assume we want to create a database for a business. One could think of obvious entities like customers, suppliers, employees, managers, products, machinery, vehicles, offices, stores, warehouses, etc. We could select each one of these as individual entities. All of them are potential sources of data we may incorporate in our diagrams (names, id numbers, ages, addresses, sizes, etc.). On the other hand, we may want to take a more generic approach, and decide to have entities like people, equipment and buildings. All customers, suppliers, employees and managers could be inside the people entity, all machinery and vehicles inside the equipment entity and all the stores and warehouses inside the buildings entity.

Which is the correct approach? It all depends of what we want to describe and how precise we want to describe it. In some cases, using more generic entities could be more effective than using more specific ones, and in other situations the opposite will be true. That is why drawing an ERD is an iterative process. After every conversation and analysis, the ERDs should be revised to better describe the system. We may start with a very generic entity for people. After analysis, we may have to replace it with customer and employee entities. This may happen for multiple reasons, for example, because we may obtain different data from each of these entities or because it is more efficient to have their data separated for retrieval. On the other hand, we may begin with the customer and employee entities and later decide that their data is so similar, that maybe we should include them inside a common people entity. The people entity will collect all data for customers and employees, but it will also contain a piece of data to tell us whether an individual “people” in the system is a customer or an employee.

An entity in an ERD is represented by the entity name in uppercase inside a box. The name and the box represent not a single entity, but a complete class of similar entities. It is not that the entity employee represents a particular employee in a business, but it represents all employees in that business.

In the end, an Entity will become a storage unit. Using the definitions studied in Unit 1 we can say that the employee entity will become a file. Inside this file, a record will be kept for each employee the business has. Each one of these records is called an entity instance. That is the main difference between an entity and an entity instance. The entity is a collection of entity instances. Fields used in entity instances are entity attributes. Within the employee entity we will store the same data for each one of the employee entity instances. Each individual piece of data obtained stored per employee will be an attribute that describes the individual entity (more on attributes in the next bullet point).

Entities can be classified as:

Strong entities. These are entities that are defined more or less completely by the data they hold (attributes). They could stand on their own. If separated from any other entities in the design, they still would describe all intrinsic data inside entity instances. Data inside these entities is independent of data in other ones. Typical entities like, employee, student, vehicle, patient, manager, all have the potential to be considered strong entities.

Weak entities. Entities that depend of other entities to be complete defined are considered to be weak. A typical example is presented in the textbook, where a Dependent Entity is weak, because it requires of the Employee Entity to make sense. Information in a dependent entity instance makes no sense, unless they are attached to a particular employee instance that claims it as a dependent.

Associative entities. These are entities that describe relations, so we will talk more about them in the bullet point about relationships below.

Attributes

A common trait among all entities is that they are being described by attributes.  Attributes are the fields of data that we are gathering from the entity. Because they are fields, they are the most elemental pieces of data describing the entity. They are, in fact, the actual pieces of data that we are going to store in the database. Examples are names, addresses, ages, quantities, descriptions, etc. We should keep track of all attributes that are relevant for an entity based in the results we want to achieve with the database.

Attributes can be classified according to their use:

Identifier attributes. These are attributes that unequivocally identify an individual entity. If we know the value of this attribute, we know which individual entity instance we are referring to. Examples are SSN for individuals, Student Ids for students, Driver’s License numbers for drivers, and credit card numbers for credit costumers. Identifier attributes are indicated in an ERD by the underlining of their name.

Partial identifier attributes. These are attributes that identify individual entity instances within a weak entity. To be completely identified, a weak entity instance requires the information of a strong entity instance to which it is associated. Without this information, the weak entity instance is partially identified, from which the name of the attribute comes. The SSN of an employee’s dependent would be a partial identifier. Partial identifier attributes are indicated in an ERD by the double underlining of their name.

Derived attributes. A derived attribute is some attribute whose contents can be calculated or obtained by applying an algorithm to other fields in the database. This kind of attributes may be incorporated in an ERD, but usually, it does not need to be implemented in a database, since we can always evaluate it on-the-fly. Derived attributes are indicated in an ERD by the surrounding of their name with square brackets ( [ ] ).

Single value attributes. Most attributes in well-defined databases are single attributes, meaning that they only hold one independent value at the time. In the Employee-Dependent example, Separate records will be kept for each different one of the employee’s dependents. In each of the records, the attribute name for a dependent entity instance is a single value attribute, because it contains the name of only one of the dependents. Since these are the most common attributes, no special distinctions are made for them in an ERD.

Multivalued attributes. In contrast to single value attributes, multivalued attributes may store various contents in one field. For example, instead of having a dependent entity, an employee entity may have an attribute called dependents, and the names of each one of her/his dependents will be stored in the same field. This way, the attribute dependents will be multivalued. Like derived attributes, multivalued attributes may be incorporated in an ERD, but they are eliminated later in design. The reason is that the design process tries to make each field in a database to become atomic, meaning that every field should contain the smallest piece of information that is appropriate for the system. We will later see how to break multivalued attributes into multiple single valued attributes when we see the process of normalization in a following unit. Multivalued attributes are indicated in an ERD by with surrounding their name with curly brackets ( { } ), also known as braces.

Composite attributes. The process of breaking up large attributes into smaller, unbreakable ones produces composite attributes. These are attributes that contain data on its own right, but when combined with other attributes in an entity produce new attributes with more powerful meanings. For example, address can be broken up into street number, street name, city, zip-code, country. Each one of these pieces of data can be an attribute. If we merge all these attributes we can create the attribute address that has a more unified meaning than any of the individual attributes. The attribute address is the composite attribute, made of all the individual pieces of data. Databases may have uses for both, the individual attributes that make the composite attribute, and the composite attributes. Names, and dates are another good example of composite attributes. Composite attributes are indicated in an ERD by giving a name for the composite attribute followed by the names of the individual attributes that make the composite up, all separated by commas and surrounded by parentheses.

At this point it is important to realize that entities, and attributes in entities are meant to hold data from the system we are analyzing. This data is supposed to be relatively large. And this is a good criterion to determine if an entity should be added to the ERD or not. For example, the textbook presents an ERD with inappropriate entities, a Treasurer entity and an Expense Report entity (Fig. 2-4 in 12th Edition). The treasurer entity was representing a single person. We do not need a whole entity in a database for a single person. We only need an entity when we are going to store data for multiple instances of similar entities. If the system had many treasurers to which accounts are assigned, maybe having a treasurer entity would not be such bad idea, to keep track of the data assigned to each treasurer. The Expense Report Entity is also not a good entity because reports are not part of the data that describes a system. They are just documents that explain the status of the system at a given time. They are not part of the data but a product of the data. What we want to express with an ERD is the data itself and its relations. In the same vein, forms to enter data into a database system cannot be entities for that system, because they are mere tools to enter data, not the data itself.

The following figure, taken for the textbook summarizes the way an Entity should be represented, including all kind of attributes with the correct displaying format:

 

Relationships

Once we are familiar with entities and their attributes we can start talking about the second part of ERDs, relationships. A relationship is any interaction between entities that needs to be recorded as a source of data. There are potentially an infinite number of relations between entities, but only the ones relevant to the system under study should be considered. Examples of relationships are: a Physician entity examines a Patient entity (the relationship is examines, the verb); or a Teacher entity teaches a Student entity (teaches is the relationship); or a Firefighter entity is dispatched to a FireScene Entity (is dispatched is the relationship). There could be many other relations between these entities, like Teacher entity plays with Student entity, but unless they provide data that is useful for the purposes of our database, they should be ignored. Keep also in mind that every relationship has at least two sides, and can be expressed in two different ways. For example, instead of saying that a Teacher entity teaches a Student entity, we could equally say that a Student entity is being taught by a Teacher entity. These are not two different relationships, but two sides of the same one, therefore, they should be represented as one.

We represent a relationship in an ERD with a solid line that connects the entities participating in the relationship and the name for the relationship. This line indicates that one or more of the entity instances in one of the entities has the relation specified in the name with one or more of the entity instance in the other entity. The individual relations between entity instances will be called a relationship instance.

 

There is a special case of a relationship that deserves its own style of line, it is the dependency relationship. We saw this kind of relationship when we talked about weak entities. A weak entity requires a relationship to a strong entity to be completely represented. A double line connecting the strong and weak entities indicates this kind of identifying relationship, as in the following diagram:

Every relationship has two important attributes that define them: degree and cardinality.

The degree of a relationship is the number of entities involved in the relationship. Unary relationships involve only one entity, binary relationships involve two entities, and ternary relationships involve three entities. In theory we could have any number of entities in a relation, but going beyond 3 complicates the analysis, and suggests that a better design should be found to express the relationship. Unary relationships are relations of an entity with itself. For example, if we have an Employee entity that describes all employees in a company, this entity could have the unary relationship called “manages”, meaning that an employee within this entity may manage other employees, also within this entity.  Binary relationships are the most common, and examples of them are the ones described at the beginning of this section. An example for a ternary relationship usually appears when there is an activity where three entities take an action that cannot be done if one of them is missing. For example, a parcel delivery company may have parcels to deliver to certain clients. If the company wants to keep track of which delivery person delivered which packet to which client, three entities are involved: DeliveryPerson, Parcel, and Client. If we eliminate either of them from the relationship, the information about the delivery will not be complete.

Samples of Unary relationships

Samples of Binary relationships

Sample of Ternary relationships

Cardinality of a relationship is the number of entity instances involved at each side of a relationship instance. Cardinality is indicated by two numbers, the minimum and maximum cardinality (m, M), for the minimum and maximum number of instances of an entity involved in a relationship. This pair of numbers is usually added on the side close to the entity they describe within the line representing the relationship. A pair like (1, 1) indicates that one and only one instance of this entity instance should be part of any relationship instance. The pair (1, M) indicates that one or more instance of an entity may be part of a relationship instance. Pairs (0, 1) and (0, M) indicate that participation of an instance of the entity in the relationship instance is optional, since there could be zero instances of this entity in the relationship.

Some ERDs may use different symbols for cardinality. A number alone, may indicate that this is the only number possible in the relationship. For example the number 2 would mean that the relationship requires exactly two entity instances to be part of the relationship. The number 1 alone would mean that the cardinality is (1,1). A letter M alone, or the infinite symbol (∞) could be used for a (0,M) cardinality.

Cardinality could also be represented graphically. Two small parallel lines crossing a relationship line may be used instead of (1,1) cardinality. A circle and a line next to it, crossing the relationship line may be used instead of (0,1) cardinality. Two added lines making a “crow’s feet” () may replace the “many” value in cardinality. Here is a summary of these symbols:

 

Based on cardinality there are two important categories of relationships:

One-to-One relationship. In this relationship, one entity instance in one side of the relationship is related to only one entity instance in the other side of the relationship. Example: as we have seen many times in TV, a policeman on patrol is always assigned a partner. This is a one-to-one relationship between Policemen entities. By the way, this is also an example of a unary relationship.

One-to-Many relationship. This is one of the most common relationships. There is one entity instance in one side of a relationship that holds the same type of relation with many entity instances in the other side of the relationship. Example: a teacher is assigned a set of students for advice. Each student has only one advisor, but it is the same one.

There is also the many-to-many relationship, in which more than one instance entities in one side of the relationship match some number of instance entities in the other side that is bigger than one. Even though these cases may appear, they should be further analyzed and converted into associate entities (described below).

Relationships in ERDs may lead to the addition of fields in one of more the entities involved in the relationship. Those fields will contain data about the relationship. For example, if a Teacher entity advices Student entities (a 1-to-many relationship), probably the name of the teacher, or its identifier attribute, should be added to the Student entity as an attribute. Adding these new fields as attributes is usually left for the following step in the database creation (developing a Relational Data Model), so we may not need to do anything here, besides drawing the relationship.

More often than not, there is more information that can be associated to a particular relationship. For example, if the advisor needs to have regular meetings with a student, information about those meetings may need to be recorded. In cases like these, when relationships themselves have attributes, rather than having a direct relationship between entities, is best to create a new entity, known as an Associative Entity. It will contain all required attributes for the relationship, and each one of the other previous entities will replace their direct relation with each other for a direct relationship with the associative entity. Cardinalities will remain on the side of the original entities. Cardinality on the associative entity side, is usually (0,M), but this needs to be evaluated by the designer. An example for the book shows the following ERD with attributes for a relationship:

 

This is later modified to use an associative entity:

As indicated before in this document, we could also use the idea of associative entities to describe many-to-many relationships. Let us review a previously shown many-to-many relationship between Employee and Course entities that we reproduce below again:  

In this relationship, zero or many employees might have completed zero or many courses. A many-to-many relationship is messy to deal with at later stages of the database development. It would be better if we could convert this relationship into one-to-many. The way to do this is by creating an entity that stores data about completion of courses. This entity will store which Employee completed which course. The new ERD should be something like this:

A similar approach can be taken when converting ternary relationships. The previously shown ternary relationship of Vendor, Part and Warehouse, and repeated here for convenience is:

This could be converted in three one-to-many relationships by adding a Supplies Entity as follows:

Further Advice on Drawing an ERD.

These are some issues to keep in mind when drawing ERDs:

As explained above, ERDs should be constructed after conversations with people in contact with the data or the analysis of documentation about that data. Rather than drawing ERDs directly, maybe we just take regular notes in a conversation, especially if we are new on this task. Later on we can analyze these notes and other documentation to produce ERDs.

When analyzing notes and documents we must pay attention to the nouns and verbs we may find in texts. Nouns can provide us with possible candidates for the entities and attributes in our ERDs. Verbs may also be candidates for relationships. We need to decide which the relevant nouns are, the ones that hold multiple pieces of data on their own, these are the entities. They may be strong or weak, their nature will determine that, but all of them will contain a set of fields to describe them. All other nouns referring to pieces of data describing an object may be attributes. If there is doubt whether a particular noun should be an entity or an attribute, remember that entities usually contain larger sets of fields associated with them (attributes). A single attribute may not be an appropriate choice for a whole entity.

Similarly, verbs may give a hint of which relationships should be added in our ERD, although if we analyze nouns first, we may find most of the relationships that way, and we may not need to add much more from the verbs. Pay attention to the ones that link two or more nouns in the narrative. One should find all relevant relationships in the system. Relevant means, that the relationship should be able to provide data that describes the system better. And it will be better if it helps to produce a database that satisfies the reasons given for its creation. Do not be redundant. Usually there is only one, at most two, relationships between any two entities. If you are getting 2 or more, consider reorganizing them in only one relationship, or decide that one (some) of them is not relevant.

When adding a relationship always think of the cardinality. Decide which relationships are one-to-one, which are optional, and which are one-to-many. If you have many-to-many relationships, consider to redraw their ERD to have associative entities instead. The same goes with high degree of the relationships. In general, high degree relationships (ternary and above) should be replaced with associative entities. Also, relationships that hold attributes definitely need to be converted to associative entities.

After adding a major piece to the ERD, go back and review it in the context of the whole diagram. See how well it fits with the rest, or if something must be changed to make it more efficient. Maybe collapse entities or add other relationships not seen before, because the entities were not present in previous drafts. As said before, drawing ERDs is an iterative process of increasing refinement. Any new draft adds new elements to the overall picture and it ends when all observed characteristics of the system are represented in the ERD.

After a design appears to be finally ready, check that every entity is reachable from any other entity using its relationships. A sign of a good ERD design is that it creates what is known as a connected graph. This is a graph which contains nodes that are reachable by edges from any other node in the graph. If we think of entities as nodes, and relationships as edges, we should be able to start in any entity and arrive to any other entity following a set of relationships. ERDs without this property may work, but probably should be re-examined to see if all relations have been added, or if the whole system needs to be broken in separate databases. More than two relationships between two single entities should also require some attention. Consider to consolidate or eliminate some of these relationships without losing the data they provide.

Also, check then that every table has an identifier attribute. This will make easier the transition of the ERD Diagram into a relational database model later on.

You may see an example of the application of these ideas in the document “ [link: https://canvas.park.edu/courses/64263/files/8477589/download?verifier=Ye77qdxnkm35vBaEcKAvJpkl6tBmbIZqmtKxvIYL&wrap=1] Unit 2 – Example of the Creation of an Entity-Relationship Diagram”.

Figures in this document were taken from the textbook material (Hoffer, Jeffrey A., Ramesh, V., Topi, Heikki, Modern Database Management, Twelfth Edition, Prentice Hall, 2016).
