# Unit 2: Lecture - Example of the Creation of an Entity-Relationship Diagram

A First Reading

We are giving the task to draw an Entity-Relationship Diagram (ERD) for a book seller. We talked with the seller and we wrote what she said, the best we could. This is what she said according to our notes:

“I need a database system to keep track of the books I have in my store. I just started with this store, and I am the only one working here. The books are piling up in the floor without being processed, and I have no help to keep track of them, so, I do not know exactly what I have. I think a database system could help me with this task. In the least, I want to be able to know the title of the books I have, the kind of books they are, you know, mystery, science, arts, … and of course, the price. 

Thinking of it, I may also need to know how to get more copies of the books if they are good. Having their ISBN number will help when looking for them, and also, having the names of the authors would help too.”

Based on these initial notes, the first thing we need be clear is the objective of the database: the goal of this project is to be able to keep track of books. This should be evident from the reading. Given that, there is a good chance that a Book entity will be needed to hold information about individual books.

After defining the goal of the project we should identify the entities and attributes from the notes. Here is the same text with the first occurrences of all nouns being highlighted:

“I need a database system to keep track of the books I have in my store. I just started with this store, and I am the only one working here. The books are piling up in the floor without being processed, and I have no help to keep track of them, so, I do not know exactly what I have. I think a database system could help me with this task. In the least, I want to be able to know the title of the books I have, the kind of books they are, you know, mystery, science, arts, … and of course, the price. 

Thinking of it, I may also need to know how to get more copies of the books if they are good. Having their ISBN number will help when looking for them, and also, having the names of the authors would help too.”

Entities

We need to recognize the relevant nouns that provide important data for the system. A noun is relevant if it may contain data that will help to describe the system, and the system has to be described in terms that will help advance our goal: keep track of books. Let us consider the nouns one by one to see if they satisfy our needs either as entities or attributes:

I. This noun refers to the seller. Does the system need to keep data about her? In her seller role, is she a source of data about the books? The answer is no. Data about the books surely can be found in the books themselves. In fact she is clueless about which books she has, that is why she wants a database. Even further, she is the only seller in that store, and we do not create entities for single entities. An Entity is supposed to have many entity instances, the seller does not qualify as an Entity. She does not qualify as an attribute either. We are talking about data about the books. Although she may own all the books in her store, this piece of data is not relevant when trying to keep track of them.

Database System. This is the system we are trying to create. Once again, this is a single system, so it may not be a good candidate to be an entity. In fact, it does not add data to help track the books. It itself may track the books, if properly implement, but it does not provide additional data to the books to be tracked, so it cannot be used as Entity or attribute in this system.

As we said before, we may need to use this noun in our ERD, since the objective explicitly mentions it. This is in fact our first Entity. It is an entity because there is a lot of different data associated with it (author price, etc.), as we will see in more detail later. It cannot be an attribute alone because it cannot be represented with one single piece of data. Single attributes like author name, title, ISBN, alone do not portrait completely all data we have about a book. We need all these attributes together to describe a book. It has to be an Entity.

The floor is the physical place where the books are lying right now. For what we noted, they do not provide any relevant piece of information to keep track of the books, so they are neither entity nor attribute. One could consider a case where the books are staked in pre-labelled sections of the floor. For example, all books received on a given day are in the north-left-corner, all received in different days are located in other designated sections of the floor. However, if this was the case, and it is important that this information be recorded, we would have to talk more with the seller about this, to confirm that this is the case and get more information on how that works. As it was said, with what is noted, we cannot make this inference.
The task referred in the text is the task to keep track of the books, so it is the objective of the system. It cannot be an entity or attribute. It is the goal.
This is the title of the book. It is a piece of data from the book. This is a definitively an attribute for the Book entity. It is actually part of the data the seller wants to keep track. It is not an entity on its own because it does not have other pieces of data that describe it. It cannot be on its own, but attached to the Book entity.

Kind of Books. Like Title, this piece of data is about the specific books. Every book has a kind, also known as type, genus, or category. The seller even mentions some of them: mystery, science, arts. We could consider this to be another attribute of the Book entity. We could use any of the terms mentioned before to name this attribute. We will use the term Category in the remainder of this discussion.

Mystery, Science, Arts. These nouns are related to the Category attribute. They are in fact possible categories for the book. Therefore they are data itself. They are possible values than the category attribute may have. It would be good to have a proper and complete list of categories for books at some point of the database development, but for the ERD, we are more or less covered by just selecting Category as an attribute for the Book entity. However, there is an issue regarding the values on the Category attribute: Can a book belong to multiple categories? For example, can a book be about Science and Arts at the same time? The answer could be both: yes and no. It will all depend of what we want to do. We will need to talk more with the seller to see what is appropriate. A list of categories should be scrutinized and it should be decided if we should allow multiple category values for a single book. This would mean that the Category field would be multivalued.  Alternatively we could allow only one value in the Category attribute. Without further information, we will assume Category is single valued for the rest of this document.  
Each book has its price, and I am sure the seller would like this value be available for every book she sells. Once again, because this is an attribute that describes each book, it should be an attribute of the Book Entity. Prices alone will not tell us much without a book being attached to them, so prices cannot be entities in this system. They are attributes.
Surely the book seller wants to know how many copies of a given book she has. This is the essence of keeping track of the books. For the same reasons as with price, copies should be an attribute of the Book entity.

ISBN numbers. Every book printed in the United States of America must have a unique identifier number. This is what the ISBN number is. Given this number, we can know exactly which book we are referring to. This is what is called an identifier attribute, and there should be no doubt that it is an essential attribute for the Book entity. It will help us to identify the book uniquely. We could think of identifying a book by its title or author name, but titles may be repeated and authors may write many different books, so a universal unique identifier is a good attribute to have for an entity like Book. Alternatively we can create our own list of numbers or codes to classify the books, similar to what libraries do, but the ISBN is already made and easily available in the book itself. No extra work needed in creating a second identification number.

Names of the Authors. This is another attribute explicitly requested by a seller, so it needs to be part of our design. A book has an author, so her/his name could be considered as an attribute of the Book Entity.
Let us think about it. Suppose that we decide to have one attribute named AuthorName in the Book class to contain the author’s name. An author’s name (and any other person’s name) is usually made up of pieces, like first name, middle name, last name, suffix, etc. We need to decide if all these pieces of data are going to be stored together, or if at some point, we will need to use them individually. For example, if we want to have a program to send letters to authors that begin “Dear John, ...” we need to separate the first name from the AuthorName attribute. We cannot do that inside the database, unless the attribute has been broken in individual pieces, or fields, from start. Therefore, if we want to address each individual piece of a name separately, we need to create attributes for each of the pieces. This would make the attribute a Composite attribute.   We could define the composite attribute AuthorName, made out of the attributes FirstName, MiddleName, and LastName. Done this way, each part is retrievable by its own attribute’s name.
On the other hand, and additional issue with author’s names is the fact that a book may have one or more authors. If we allow multiple author names in a composite attribute, it is going to be a mess. For example: suppose there are two authors for a book, ‘John Jones’ and ‘Robert Robertson’. The attribute FirstName will contain the first names ‘John Robert’ and the attribute LastName will contain the last names ‘Jones Robertson’. Somebody trying to see who the authors are may receive ‘John Robert Jones Robertson’ as the full name, or address a letter to ‘Dear John Robert, …”. These problems are compounded if there are more than two authors for a book. There has to be a better way. And because of that, we explore the idea of Author being an entity on its own.
Could an Author be an entity? Sure! It satisfies the requirements for an Entity of being a source of related data. First name, Middle Name and Last Name are all attributes that describe a single Author. It is also possible to have other attributes describing the Author, like address, phone number, age, etc. So it is natural to think of Author as an Entity. Doing this in our particular example, will allow us to differentiate individual entity instances, each one describing an individual author, without confusion. For all these reasons in this case, making Author an entity is more appropriate than making it an attribute.
The analysis of nouns produced the entities and attributes shown in the following ERD:

In the Book Entity we have five single valued attributes and we use ISBN as the identifying attribute, represented by the underline of the attribute’s name. The Author Entity has one composite attribute made out of three singled value attributes. However, the Author Entity is incomplete. We must guarantee that every entity has an identifying attribute. This way, every entity instance can be accessed without confusion or ambiguity and the ERD becomes easier to translate later into a database design. We could select the full AuthorName attribute as the identifying attribute. This is not unheard of. Unfortunately, two totally different people may have the same exact full name. There is still a need to differentiate them. To do that we could use a number, ‘John Jones 1’ and ‘John Jones 2’, for example. This is what is done for e-mail address and web accounts. This would require adding an extra attribute to hold this number, and if we are going to do that, it would be better to plan ahead and give an actual code to every author, something that will allow for expansion of the system later on and ease of read in the present. So, instead of just a number we could use a code, for example, the author’s initials followed by a 3 digit code, for example JJ-001. Whichever is the format code we decide to use, it is clear that we need to add an identifying attribute to this entity. Let us call this identifying attribute AuthorID. The ERD will now be:

 

 

 

Relationships

We have created the Author entity because it contained more data that a single attribute in the Book Entity can handle. Logically, it is a good choice to separate two independent sources of data; to separate the authors from the book themselves. However, books are not created expontaneously, books have authors, some more than one. This is a relationship: ‘Author writes Book’, and in the context of our system, is an important relationship to consider. It is an implicit relationship, because nothing in the text is telling us that authors write books, but it is a common knowledge fact, and we should use all the knowledge we have about a subject if we want to succeed describing the system. To represent the relationship, we must draw a solid line between the two entities we have. We may label that line with the word “writes” and this defines the relationship. It is a binary relationship because it involves two entities. We should further complete this diagram by adding the cardinality to each side of the line. We know that a book may be written by one or many authors, but in the other hand, an author may write one or many books. This indicates that the relation is a many-to-many relationship, with a minimum number of 1 at each side.  If we want, we could allow the minimum cardinality number to be 0. If we do this we are indicating that some books may not have authors, and that we are allowing some authors being in the database without having any of their books in the store. For this example we will keep the minimum cardinality at 1. The update ERD so far is as follows (notice that Entities were re-drawn in different position within the diagram):

 

One more thing we need to consider after drawing a relationship, is to decide if it requires attributes. The relationship Author write Book is a many to many relationship, so many authors could be writing a single book. Usually, the order of appearance of the author’s name is important. The first author usually has more contributions than the second author, therefore saving this information could be useful. Let us call this attribute the AuthorRank. The AuthorRank does not belong into the Author Entity, because an author could be first author in one book and second author in another. It also does not belong into the Book Entity, because in our current design we separated all author’s info into the Author Entity. AuthorRank is and attribute for the Wrote relation since it only appears when authors write a book. An update ERD showing this attribute could be drawn as follows:

  

This is a complete ERD for the notes we took. It described all entities and relationships we found in our analysis to describe our data system. However, it would be a better if we could have the diagram ready for the next step, the drawing of a relational data model. In this next step, many-to-many relationships would have to be converted into one-to-many relationships. Instead of doing it then, it will be better to do it in the ERD itself.

To do this conversion we will use an Associative Entity. An Associative Entity is an entity that contains information about a relationship. It has attributes like other entities, but these are attributes for the relationship. We already have an attribute for the Wrote relationship, so we must use that attribute as part of our associative entity. The name of the associative entity could be the same as the relationship, Wrote. The associative entity is differentiated from the other entities by being drawn using a box with rounded edges.  We will need to change the lines and their cardinalities of the old relationship. Instead of a single line connecting the Author and Book entities, we must have a line joining the Author entity with the Wrote associative entity, and another line joining the Wrote associative entity with the Book entity, like this:

 

By doing this change we are separating the fact that authors write books into two pieces: one indicating that the authors write and another indicating that books are written. To complete the diagram we need to add the cardinalities. We need to rethink their values considering the new associative entity. We indicated that one author can write many books. This suggests that we could use 1 as the minimum and maximum cardinality in the author side, while we have cardinality of 1 or more books in the Wrote entity side. Notice we no longer have to use the cardinality of 1 or more authors in the Author side, because the new relation does not make a connection with a book in particular at this stage, it only states that an author writes. Similarly, a book may be written by 1 or many authors, therefore we could use 1 as the minimum and maximum cardinality in the book side, while we have cardinality of 1 or more books in the Wrote entity side. Notice again that we no longer have to use the cardinality of 1 or more books in the Book side, because the new relation does not make a connection with an author in particular at this stage, it only states that an a book is written. With these changes the final ERD looks like this:

 

Notice that the associate entity does not has an identifying attribute yet. It is OK, this will come in later in the following step, when creating a relational data model. We could add it here, but really the important identifying attributes are the ones for proper entities, not associative entities.

The relationship “Author writes Book” was an implicit relationship. The seller did not tell us of this relationship, it is implied. In fact, it is common knowledge. Like this, there are plenty of common knowledge facts that are not made explicit in conversations, but need to be represented in ERDs to make them meaningful. A good developer makes a point of finding these common knowledge facts in conversations, because what may be common knowledge within certain business may not be so for the general public.

Another strategy we may use to find relationships in a system is to analyze the verbs in the notes we made. Sometimes, this may produce additional insights. I will invite you to re-read the original notes we had on this case study and see if you can find any other relationship that is meaningful for this system we are trying to describe. I believe, we already captured all the relationships we have in this system, but you may have a different perspective.

 

More to Update

The book seller call us later, and left the following message in the answering machine:

“Hi! I forgot to tell you, I also would like to know who my customers are. I want to be able to contact them if I think they may be interested on some new book I have. This business is only going to work if I keep in personal contact with my clients. Their phone number will be enough for now, but I also would like to know which books they ordered. I usually deliver these books to my customers, and take note of the date when they were ordered and when they were delivered. A client may order more than one book at the time, and some of them buy many copies of the same book to give to their employees for training. I give every order an individual number to avoid confusion on what was ordered and I give discounts on each book title ordered on the large orders, depending on how many books were ordered, but there is not a set rule for that, since some books are more valuable than others. Sorry I did not tell you this before, but it just came to my mind. Bye!”

This message extended the scope of our ERD. We will need to do a similar analysis than the one we did before, create new entities and relationships, and add them to the previous ERD we had. I will let the reader to do that, but I will make the following remarks:

Based on what was said, a Customer entity may need to be added. This entity will keep track of information about the Customer. Name, address, phone, email will be good attributes to have. Also, we may give a code to every customer called CustomerID and use it as an identifying attribute.

Another entity that will need to be added is the Order entity to keep track of all data for every order made by customers. An order has a number, as described by the seller. This could be the identifying attribute. Dates for the order and its delivery should be stored in the Order entity. A reference to the client ordering the books could also be incorporated in the Order entity using the CustomerID.

Naturally, we also should take note of all books ordered. Now that we have a Book entity identified by the attribute ISBN, we could use this same attribute to refer to the book in the order. The ordered quantity and the percentage of discount given to the particular title. We could incorporate all this data about the titles ordered in the Order Entity, but we do not know how many titles will be ordered, so we cannot keep enough fields in the Order entity for each of the titles. It would best to have another entity, called OrderLine. An OrderLine instance would keep the information about one title ordered, its ISBN, quantity ordered, and the percentage of discount given to this title. An Order entity instance may have many OrderLine entity instances. This is the relationship between these two entities. The OrderLine could have as the identifying attribute the Order number, together with a consecutive number in the order to differentiate each title ordered. For example, order number 343, line 1, or. This identifying attribute would also be a composite attribute for OrderLine.

The relationships to be added are:

An order is made of one or more order lines.

A customer can make one or more orders

Every order line makes reference to one book, but a book may appear in many order lines.
