# Unit 3: Discussion

Introduction

Make your initial post by 11:59 PM Wednesday and reply to at least two classmates by 11:59 PM Sunday. Please keep your posts civil and show respect to your classmates.

Directions

Identify a device near you that uses biometric authentication method. Describe the details about the device and the biometric authentication method it is using. Search on the internet to find more technical details about this method, including what information is collected as feature vector, how was the authentication performed, how accurate is such an authentication method, is there a way to bypass this authentication. What is your experience of using this authentication?

Respond to at least two different students. Talk about your opinion after reading their passage. Include any references you find to support or refute another person’s opinions. Be polite if you disagree.

ULOs Reflected In Discussion

Explain authentication mechanisms in various systems and their potential vulnerabilities (CLO 2, 3)

**My Score:** 20.0/?

---

## My Discussion Posts

**Posted:** 2022-01-27T03:37:02Z

Class,

A biometric authentication method that I have become quite fond of is the side-mounted finger print scanner for my phone as it's easily authenticates when I turn on my phone screen. The way this works is by comparing the digest of the shape signature. The feature vector is generated by comparing the reference axis to the shape signature, which is determined by the distance between each ridge. To speed up the process a digest is made of the shape signature to compare with the current authentication. ((Ceguerra & Koprinska, 2002)

This method of authentication isn't perfect as a wet, dirty or injured finger can give false readings. There is also multiple ways to bypass or trick a fingerprint scanner: masterprints, harvesting unsecured images, forged fingerprints, software exploits, and residual fingerprints. (Reynolds, 2021) Unless you are a high priority target, the effort required to use one of the exploits wouldn't be worth a hackers time.

 

Ceguerra, A., & Koprinska, I. (2002). Automatic fingerprint verification using Neural Networks. Artificial Neural Networks — ICANN 2002, 1281–1286.  [link: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-46084-5_207] https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-46084-5_207

Reynolds, C. (2021, October 1). How hackers bypass fingerprint scanners. Bit Rebels. Retrieved January 27, 2022, from https://bitrebels.com/business/how-hackers-bypass-fingerprint-scanners/

---
