# Unit 1: Content Highlights - Intro to Databases

Introduction

This page highlights the main points on the introductory chapter of the textbook. It is recommended to first read this week’s assigned chapters from the textbook, and then come back to this document for further commentary.

The highlights of this week’s readings are:

Data, Information and MetaData

The main difference between data and information is that information is data organized to obtain some knowledge. Sources of data are infinite: the number of steps one took every day, the number of ants found walking all over the coffee machine in the morning, the number of finger taps a person sitting next to you will have to make before someone ask her/him to stop, etc. They are all sources of data, but they are not information yet. In order to become information, they must be organized to answer a particular question. One may know that one took 100 steps before breakfast, that they were 3 ants in the coffee machine this morning and that one asked the person sitting-next to stop tapping her/his fingers after 10 taps. Unless this information is stored somewhere and analyzed they will not become information. One may care about the numbers of steps one takes for fitness reasons. If we store this data in a piece of paper and compare it with similar information taking over a period of time we could postulate something about this data, for example, we could say that we are walking less/the same/more now that we did before. That is the knowledge. In order to obtain this knowledge we organized the data in a piece of paper, in a way we can recognize what it means later, and we analyze it. That is information, the data organized.  If one has a good memory, one could remember and organize all this data in one’s mind. One could also use a piece of paper or a computer to organize it. If we use a database management system, we have an electronic database.

Metadata is data about data. Continuing with the example above, if we keep information in sheets of paper about the number of steps we took every day, we also could tell how many days we recorded this data, how many pages it took to record it, and/or how many pencils we lost while recording this data. All these are data that has nothing to do directly with the number of steps we took, but they are data about the data we took. In a computer database management system metadata is important, because it keeps tracks of the way the computer handles our data. The computer will use files and records to store our data, so it is imperative for the computer to know which files are those files, where are they located, how big they are, and more importantly, how the data inside is being organized, so that we can convert it into knowledge. All these pieces of information are the metadata that the database management system keeps in other files and records.

Field, Record, and File

We already have been talking about these terms, so we better define them.

A field is the basic unit of data in an electronic database. A field stores the most basic unit of data we want to keep. A field does not have a natural size limit. Its size depends of what the designer of the database plans to store in it. It could be a number, a character, a word, a sentence, full sentences, a complete book, an image, a sound-bite, a video clip, etc. If we make the analogy with a spreadsheet, a field is an individual cell in that spreadsheet. It can store a number, text, or a formula. The most important consideration to keep in mind when creating a field, is that it should contain the smallest piece of data we want to be able to analyze, based on the knowledge we want to produce. We could store a whole book in a field, but if we want to be able to retrieve only a statement from that book, we best create a field per each statement in the database. If we want to be able to retrieve only a word, we better create a field per word. A more typical example is an address. We can use a field to contain an address. Every time we ask the database for the address, it will give us back the complete address. If on the other hand we only want to retrieve the zip code, we should have stored each element of the address in separated fields: street number, street name, city, and zip-code. In relational databases (the ones that we will use most in this course), a field is also known as a column.

A record is a collection of related fields. Records contain information about a particular object, event, issue, or relation. For example a record for a patient may include his name, address, phone, e-mail, allergies, clinical history, etc. A record of grades may contain a particular grade for a given course in a given University a given student has, or it could also contain all grades this student ever had in that course. A database designer can create any type of records s/he thinks necessary, but the main concern when creating a record is to group fields in a way that will make it efficient to retrieve knowledge out of them. For example, if the clinical history of a patient contains many different types of data (like prescribed medicine, tests made, visits to the clinician made, etc.), rather than make this part of the fields of the patient record, we could create a different record for prescribed medicine, clinical tests, and consultations. By doing these we can access these pieces of information more logically and directly that from a single patient record. In relational databases, a record is also known as a row.

A file is collection of records containing the exact same fields. A file contains all records we have about the same objects, events, issues, or relations we found in the database.  For example, a patient file may contain all records we have of all patients in the system. In relational databases, a file is also known as a table.

Transactional Databases and Data Warehouses

Based on their use, there are two kinds of databases we will study in this course. Transactional Databases are databases used daily for management of an enterprise. They keep track of transactions constantly happening in the database, updating fields, records and files if needed, and keeping up-to-date the status of the information they contain. Examples are the banks’ databases that keep track of the account status of each of their customers and record all movements made within those accounts. We will deal with these databases most of the class. Data Warehouses, on the other hand, are databases created with the sole purpose of helping the management of a company to make decisions about their business. They are historical records that need not to be updated with the current data, because they hold data from the past, data that will not change. Data warehouses and their little cousins, Data Marts, will be the topic of the last part of the course.

File Processing and Database Processing

One of the goals of Chapter 1 is to emphasize the importance of using database processing when handling data. There is no question than having data in sheets of paper is less practical than having it in a computer. For once, we can compute information in an electronic form more efficiently than extracting in from pieces of paper and calculating them by hand. We could use Excel to do this more efficiently. However, using a Database approach is still more efficient than using a spreadsheet. In a spreadsheet all data about a subject is flat, meaning that the spreadsheet does not make distinctions between patients in a clinic and the doctors in the same clinic. For a spreadsheet most data are numbers, text or formulas, all equally valuable or not. In a database approach, data is organized in pieces that are related to each other in ways that resemble their true nature in the real world. In a database approach, data about patients and data about doctors are stored in separate files, but these files are related in ways that reflect the interaction of patients with doctors. The database management system ensures that these relations are preserved, and the knowledge obtained from these arrangements is produced efficiently.

Life Cycle of Database

For those familiar with programming, the life cycle of a program involves design, implementation, maintenance and a loop back to design again. Since a database is also a piece of software, its life cycle is no different. One must design the database, implement it, and maintain it. From its use and maintenance, new needs and improvements will appear that will prompt database managers to re-design, implement the changes and maintain the new operations.
